I'm Yan from 1A.
Today, I want to talk about the topic you probably already heard about: IOT, or devices that are somewhat connected to the Internet, for the future.
There are two main issues with developing this technology at the moment:

The first one is if you look at Internet of things, like everyone is focusing on the iPad and Internet.
So you see a lot of companies, taking existing device, and calling it a smart washing machine or a smart fridge, but in the end it's the same device, and you have a lot benefits from using it with your smart phone.
We believe that instead, people should focus much more on the things: on the key.
Because we're at a point where we have a lot potential to change all the every day objects, to kind of redefine and re-invent how the things that make up everything you see that has been made by humans.
You're now reaching a point, you can put the microcontroller in anything.
So what does that mean?
What could a washing machine of the future really be, the fridge, or window, or really anything.

The concept we came up with the second issue we had is these kinds of devices coming on the market are patronizing, they try to make decisions for you, it's actually a main function of them most of the time.
You're probably familiar term from Internet where all the information, very, very small part is presented to you and it gets a bit dangerous.
[indiscernible] changes to what it thinks is best for you.
Some information is just not accessible for you anymore and ceases to exist, and you're actually being limited in your freedom, which should not be the goal.
This gives you more possibilities in life and that's why we came up with intelligent by design, designate by design is a new way to design and develop these new things.
The way you do it, you start by gaining a very deep understanding of how a certain thing works and you try to expect kind of main function, the main call that helps us.
Then it's a best budget: forget everything how this thing works today and you redesigned it from scratch with the new technology and try to represent the function in the purest form, but elevated by modern technology.

This means that kind of every part of this new device has to reflect this function itself.
Intelligent as the way it's designed, and works so it can best attempt to fill our needs and give us more possibilities in life.
Our new product we're working with now is a smart phone and it's also intelligent by design.
So it's supposed to be the future: What should a door be?

We came up as it should be protective, give you feeling of security, even when you're not at home.
It showed the barrier to people who were not allowed go in, but be anything but a barrier to yourself.
Actually, it should actually clear the way and not be in your way.

How did we come up with it?
We'll see today.
So it still looks like a door.
But we got rid of the locks and we have a sleek technology and we approach the door, and with with a valid key it'll open by itself.
If you don't have a key.
The screen will show you a family picture or name and it'll connect you to a video call and he can decide if he lets you in or not.
If someone [indiscernible] as soon as they start, can you say hello to them.
Yeah, and what I kind of want everyone to understand today, in our opinion, there's a turning point, like 20 years ago, early days of the Internet, where we are kind of defining as a foundation future of the look and we should be careful about which values these new products have.
And make sure this to you device, these new things have a positive impact.

It is our goal to have intelligent by design as our mentor, and have good intention.
For us, Rust is a secure programming language, we are happy to be able to sponsor this conference and we also [indiscernible] tackets.

Oh yeah, you're all invited to our party tonight, spaces are limited but we have several DJ's, live music.
Yeah, enjoy that.
Thanks.
