A my name is Robert from Ethcore. It's not so often that an event like this comes around and we are really glad hello. Ah. Perfect. First, I want to give you an idea of what it's all about. So we are a team of mathematicians, commune upon scientists, and experts. We're working on building a future our peer Rust implementation of peer watching so if you're not familiar -- this is much more than a payments platform. It allows you to deploy arbitrary programs, which could be execute by the transactions, and correct and predictable execution is part of the state transition. So immensely are more power than the block chains familiar. And while Ethcore come up with the theorem, Rust has enabled us to come up with the implement easy of this. I'm guessing most of you are not here because of Crypto or Blockchain.S. Before I was working on Blockchain and Crypto currency, I've been a Rust enthusiast the past three years or so. And this is important for May to be here. Now, one of the things that has brought us here today is the language. Even more so, it's the desire to build something new and build something better. That's one of the reasons I'm so excited about the Ethcore problems, we're building financial technology, using a Next Generation programming language. Now, the ideals of safety, of speed, of concurrency are really important when you're writing something that has to be fast and has a lot value at stake. So today, parody is one of the largest Rust problemses on GitHub. Excluding the Rust compiler itself and other Servo browser, we've been developing it the last 10 months and tomorrow, we'll be hosting the workshop in the Cryptor and block chain room, where we want to share should have the lessons we have learned over this period. So we'll be talking about Block Chain clients, how parody works or, you know, just any kind of Block Chain related questions and we have got a table set set up over there for the rest of the conference if you have any questions, come on by and enjoy the rest of Rust.
