Thanks, I'm Yan from 1A. And today, I want to talk about the topic you probably already heard B which is IUT or devices that are somewhat connected to the Internet for the future. And like, the two main issues which this technology is developing at the moment. So first one S if you look at Internet of things, like everyone is focusing on the iPAD and Internet. So you see a lot of companies, taking existing device, and calling it a smart washing machine or a Smart ... but in the end, it's the same device and you have a lot benefits from using it with your Smart Phone. We believe that instead, people should focus much more on the things, on the key. Because we're at a point where we have a lot potential to change all the every day objects to kind of redefine and re-invent how the things that make up. Everything you see has been made by humans. And you're now reaching a point, you can put the micro controller in. So what does that mean? What could a washing machine of the future really be, the share or window or really anything.



The concept we came up with -- sorry -- the second issue we had is these kinds of devices coming on the market are not only patronizing, and they try to make decisions for you, it's actually a main function of them most of the time and you're probably familiar term from Internet where all the information, very, very small part is presented to you and it gets a bit dangerous. [indiscernible] changes to what it thinks is best for you. Part is just not accessible for you anymore and cease to exist, and you're actually being limited in your freedom, which would not be the goal. This gives you more possibilities in life. And that's why we came up with intelligent by design, designate by design is a new way to design and develop this new, anything, these new things and the way you do it, you start by gaining a very deep understanding of how a certain thing works and you try to expect kind of main function, the main call that helps us. And then it's a best budget. Forget everything how this thing works today and you redesigned it from scratch with the new technology and try to [indiscernible] that represent that is function in the purest form but it's elevated by modern technology.



This means that kind of every part of this new device has to reflect this function, has to be, itself, intelligent as the way it's designed and works so it can best attempt to our needs and give us more possibilities in life. And our news product we're working with now is a smart phone and it's also intelligent by design. So it's supposed to be the future. What should a door be and we came up as it should be protective, give you feeling of security, like even when you're not at home. It showed the barrier to people who were not A loud go in, but be anything but a barrier tow yourself. And actually, it should actually clear the way and not be in your way. And how did we come up with it, we initial today. So it still looks like a door. But we got rid of the locks and we have a sleek full of technology and we approach the door, and witha with a valid key. And it'll open by itself. If you don't have a key. The screen will show you a family picture or name and it'll connect you to a video call and he can decide if he lets you in or not. If someone [indiscernible] as soon as they start, can you say hello to them. Yeah, and what I kind of want everyone to understand today, in our opinion, there's a turning point, like 20 years ago, early days of the Internet, where we are kind of defining as a foundation future of the look and we should be careful about which values these new products have. And make sure this to you device, these new things have a positive impact.



It is our goal to have intelligent by design as our mentor, and have good initialing, and for us, Rust is a secure programming language, we are happy to be able to sponsor this conference and we also [indiscernible] tackets. And yeah, you're all invited to throw a party tonight, our expenses are limited but we have several deficiency DJ's, live music. Yeah, enjoy that. Thanks.
